ORIGINAL ARTICLES

Force Feedback Plays a Significant Role in Minimally

Invasive Surgery
Results and Analysis

Gregory Tholey, BS,* Jaydev P. Desai, PhD,*† and Andres E. Castellanos, MD‡

Objective: To evaluate the role of force feedback with applications
to minimally invasive surgery (MIS). Two research hypotheses were
tested using our automated laparoscopic grasper.
Summary Background Data: Conventional laparoscopic tools do
not have the ability of providing force feedback to a surgeon when
in use with or without robotic surgical systems. Loss of haptic (force
and tactile) feedback in MIS procedures is a disadvantage to sur-
geons since they are conventionally used to palpating tissues to
diagnose tissues as normal or abnormal. Therefore, the need exists to
incorporate force feedback into laparoscopic tools.
Methods: We have developed an automated laparoscopic grasper
with force feedback capability to help surgeons differentiate tissue
stiffness through a haptic interface device. We tested our system
with 20 human subjects (10 surgeons and 10 nonsurgeons) using our
grasper to evaluate the role of force feedback to characterize tissues
and answer 2 research hypotheses.
Results: Our experiments conﬁrmed 1 of our 2 research hypotheses,
namely, providing both vision and force feedback leads to better
tissue characterization than only vision feedback or only force
feedback.
Conclusions: We have validated 1 of our 2 research hypotheses
regarding incorporating force feedback with vision feedback to
characterize tissues of varying stiffness.

(Ann Surg 2005;241: 102–109)

From the †Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Drexel University College
of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; *Program for Robotics, Intel-
ligent Sensing, and Mechatronics (PRISM) Laboratory, Department of
Mechanical Engineering and Mechanics, Drexel University, Philadel-
phia, Pennsylvania; and the ‡Department of Surgery, Drexel University
College of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Address correspondence to: Jaydev P. Desai, PhD, Drexel University, 3141
Chestnut St., MEM Department, Room 2-115, Philadelphia, PA 19104.
E-mail: desai@coe.drexel.edu.

Copyright © 2004 by Lippincott Williams & Wilkins
ISSN: 0003-4932/05/24101-0102
DOI: 10.1097/01.sla.0000149301.60553.1e

102

Minimally invasive surgical (MIS) procedures using long

instruments have profoundly inﬂuenced modern sur-
gery by decreasing invasiveness, therefore minimizing pa-
tient recovery time and cost. However, surgical procedures
using long tools inserted through small ports on the body
deprive surgeons of the depth perception, dexterity, sense of
touch, and straightforward hand-eye coordination that they
are accustomed to in open procedures. Surgeons have tradi-
tionally relied on the combination of their tactile and visual
abilities to diagnose tissue as normal or abnormal.1

The use of laparoscopic tools capable of providing
force feedback is lacking in current robot-assisted surgical
systems. Current robotic surgical systems, while providing
excellent visual feedback, are incapable of providing force
feedback. Surgeons who operate using these robotic assis-
tants do not have force and tactile feedback from the opera-
tive site as they are now indirectly in contact with the surgical
site instrumented tools. Therefore, the need to incorporate
force feedback capabilities into MIS procedures, especially
robotically assisted procedures, provides an excellent oppor-
tunity to improve the quality of surgical procedures. Improve-
ments in MIS systems will lead to signiﬁcant societal impacts
through better patient care, reduced morbidity, shorter hos-
pital stays, reduced trauma, faster recovery times, and lower
health care costs.

While research has been done on developing laparo-
scopic tools capable of providing force feedback, their use in
surgical practice is limited by the size of these instrumented
laparoscopic tools and the ease of use in surgical procedures.
As a result of these shortcomings, our goal was to (a) design
and develop a modular laparoscopic tool, which would pro-
vide force feedback for tissue characterization; and (b) using
the developed laparoscopic grasper, we wanted to evaluate
the role of force feedback in MIS. In this paper, we will focus
primarily on the second goal, namely, the evaluation of the
role of force feedback in MIS. We have developed an inter-
face to aid the surgeons in characterizing artiﬁcial tissues of
varying stiffness (prepared using hydrogels), which are a
reasonable approximation to the tissues encountered by sur-

Annals of Surgery • Volume 241, Number 1, January 2005

Annals of Surgery • Volume 241, Number 1, January 2005

Force Feedback and Minimally Invasive Surgery

geons in liver tumor resection. The soft tissues in our experi-
ments will approximately represent normal liver tissue, medium
tissues will approximately represent a tumor in the formation
stage, and hard tissues will approximately represent a fully
developed tumor. These tissue samples were tested by palpation
by our surgeon collaborator to make a realistic choice of artiﬁ-
cial tissue samples in our experimental studies.

Several researchers have already proposed solutions to
incorporate force feedback into current laparoscopic tools.2– 8
Many of these solutions involve adding force sensors, such as
strain gauges, to record forces at the tool tip or developing a
new robotic manipulator used to operate laparoscopic tools
and obtain force feedback. Additional work has been done in
creating new laparoscopic tools with force feedback incorpo-
rated into their designs.9 –12 However, there still exist many
problems within the designs of laparoscopic tools and their
use in robotic surgery.13,14 Schurr et al15 have developed a
2-arm, master-slave manipulator called ARTEMIS for use by
surgeons. Dario et al16 have developed a miniature robotic
surgical system for colonoscopy. Several master-slave ro-
botic surgical systems have also been commercially devel-
oped. However, these systems do not provide force feedback
to the surgeon. Current research within the area of force
feedback has led to the use of cable-driven mechanisms to
reduce backlash and play in the mechanism.17–19

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Prototype Development

In this section, we brieﬂy describe the laparoscopic
grasper that was designed and developed in our laboratory for
evaluating the role of force and vision feedback in surgery.
Our design for the laparoscopic grasper with force feedback
capability was guided by constraints associated with current
laparoscopic tools. The constraints were a shaft diameter of
15 mm, a 90-degree angle between the jaws at the maximum
open position, and accurate positioning of the jaws in relation
to the handle of the tool. Using these constraints, we devel-
oped a cable-driven pulley mechanism controlled by a DC
motor for the actuation of the jaws (see Fig. 1a). The entire

assembly comprised of the laparoscopic grasper and motor
was mounted on an aluminum plate that could be attached to
a robot arm for teleoperation (see Fig. 2). Each steel cable,
connected to a pulley mounted on the motor, traveled through
the main shaft to a corresponding pulley for each jaw. At each
jaw pulley,
the cable wrapped around the pulley in the
opposite direction compared with the other (one clockwise,
one counterclockwise). This provided the opposing motion
for the opening and closing of the jaws and also allowed for
accurate positioning of the jaws. The initial prototype was
designed as a grasper and contained 2 serrated jaws to
facilitate grasping of tissue. A tensioning device for the steel
cables was also added to allow for easy adjustments in the
mechanism. The novelty of our design is that it can also
incorporate tissue-cutting blades (as shown schematically in
Fig. 1b) instead of the grasper jaws (and they are readily
interchangeable) due to the quick-change feature in our pro-
totype. This was achieved by mounting the jaws on the
outside of the shaft by the use of a screw. This change was
included as concurrent research in our laboratory consists of
studying cutting and dissection tasks for reality-based mod-
eling of tool and tissue interaction forces in MIS.
Characterization of Tissue Samples

The ﬁrst experiment was to determine the effectiveness
of our automated grasper to correctly characterize tissues of
varying hardness through a haptic- and vision-based display
before proceeding to experimental studies with human sub-
jects on evaluating the role of force feedback in MIS. We
tested soft, medium, and hard tissue samples. The soft tissue
samples approximately represented normal liver tissue, while
the medium tissue samples approximately represented a tu-
mor in the formation stage, and the hard samples approxi-
mately represented a fully developed tumor. Softer samples

FIGURE 1. A), Prototype of the laparoscopic grasper with force
feedback and B), schematic of the cutting jaws at the laparo-
scopic tool tip.

FIGURE 2. The laparoscopic grasper attached to the Mitsubishi
robot arm for tissue manipulation.

© 2004 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins

103

Tholey et al

Annals of Surgery • Volume 241, Number 1, January 2005

required less force to deform, while harder samples required
more force for the same deformation. To successfully com-
plete this experiment, we developed several artiﬁcial tissue
samples from hydrogel material. The hydrogel was created
using a combination of polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) and polyvi-
nyl pyrrolidone (PVP) in the consistency of 99% PVA and
1% PVP in a 10% concentration. This solution was then cast
into molds and subjected to several freezing/thawing cycles.
Six cycles were performed, and after each cycle a sample was
removed. Sample 1, which was removed ﬁrst, represented the
softest
tissue, while sample 6, which was removed last,
represented the hardest tissue. We performed compression
tests on the 6 artiﬁcial tissue samples on an Instron machine
to verify that there was a marked difference in the tissue
stiffness prior to using the tissue samples in our research
hypothesis testing. We experimentally observed a signiﬁcant
difference in the tissue hardness for all the 6 samples.

We chose 3 different tissue samples for the tissue
characterization experiment and used the automated laparo-
scopic grasper developed in our laboratory for this experi-
ment. The samples were grasped in the laparoscopic tool, and
measurements of the grasping force and angular displacement
of the jaws were recorded. The grasping force was calculated
by the amount of current applied to the motor. Figure 3 shows
a plot of the grasping force as felt by the user while grasping
tissues of varying hardness. As seen from the ﬁgure, for the
same jaw displacement, tissue sample 6 had a higher grasping
force than samples 3 and 1. This conﬁrmed that the auto-
mated grasper was capable of providing force feedback,
which varied with the tissue hardness.

FIGURE 3. Tissue characterization graph for the three artificial
tissue samples showing force vs. angular position of the jaw.

104

Experimental Setup and Research Protocol for
Tissue Characterization

We were interested in evaluating the role of force
feedback in tissue characterization. For this we used only
vision feedback, only force feedback, a combination of vision
and force feedback, and direct exploration with the tissue
samples. To prevent any learning, we gave the subjects
adequate time to practice with the system before the experi-
mentation began (details in Results section).

Vision (V) Feedback Protocol

For the ﬁrst part of the experiment, the subject was
presented with 3 random tissue samples of varying consis-
tency to be grasped with the prototype. The ﬁrst test consisted
of using only vision feedback from the remote site to rank the
samples from softest to hardest. The subject was able to view
the grasping of the samples through a video screen to view
the deformation of the sample. For this experiment, we used
a standard CCD video camera that was approximately 1 foot
in the horizontal position and approximately 6 inches in the
vertical, from the sample, therefore giving an isometric view of
the grasper jaws and the tissue sample. The jaws closed on the
tissue to a desired angle to show the subject the deformation of
the tissue. One sample at a time was grasped, and the subject
could view the grasping on a video screen. Once the 3 samples
(soft, medium, and hard) had been presented, the subject was
asked to rank them from softest to hardest based on their
observations. It should be noted that during each trial, the subject
could request a replay of 1 or more of the samples before
ranking the samples, therefore reducing error due to random
guessing or forgetting which sample was soft, medium, and
hard. The subject then ranked the 3 samples, and the process was
repeated for a total of 5 trials. Each trial was repeated with the
same samples randomly arrayed to prevent any memorization of
the samples.

Force (F) Feedback Protocol

The second test consisted of the same method with the
exception of using force feedback instead of vision feedback
to characterize the tissue. For this experiment, the subject
interacted with the PHANToM (haptic interface device man-
ufactured by Sensable Technologies, Woburn, MA) by in-
serting their ﬁnger in a thimble attached to the arm of the
PHANToM (see Fig. 3). The direction of the force feedback
within the PHANToM was vertical and acting upwards.
Therefore, the subject was required to hold the edge of the
desk with their thumb under the desk and other 3 ﬁngers
resting on top of the desk. Through the keyboard, an operator
opened and closed the jaws while the subject received force
feedback from each sample. This setup was representative of
palpation (using the thumb and foreﬁnger) done by surgeons
(although virtual) where arm dynamics do not affect the

© 2004 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins

Annals of Surgery • Volume 241, Number 1, January 2005

Force Feedback and Minimally Invasive Surgery

results. The grasper was set to close the jaws to the same
angle for each sample to keep the deformation constant.
Therefore, the only variable that existed was the amount of
force required for the deformation, and this force was based
on the tissue’s stiffness. After the closure of the jaws to the
prespeciﬁed angle (same as in the vision feedback experi-
ment), the subject could manipulate the PHANToM with
their index ﬁnger to characterize the amount of grasping force
for that particular sample. This process was repeated for the
3 tissue samples in the trial, and the subject was given the
option to feel any or all of the samples again. The subject then
ranked the 3 samples in order from softest to hardest. This
process was also repeated for a total of 5 trials.

Vision and Force (V ⴙ F) Feedback Protocol

The third test consisted of using both force feedback
and vision feedback to differentiate between the 3 tissue sam-
ples. This test was performed in the same way as the force test
with the exception of having video feedback of the grasping.
The subject was able to view the deformation of the tissue while
also receiving force feedback from the PHANToM. Again, the
subject was presented with the 3 samples and was asked to rank
them from softest to hardest. An opportunity for a replay of any
or all samples was given during each trial. A total of 5 trials were
performed for this part.

Direct Exploration (DE) Protocol

The ﬁnal test of this experiment was to ask the subject
to rank the 3 tissue samples from softest to hardest based on
direct exploration of the samples with their ﬁngers. Only 1
trial was required for this protocol.

Data Collection and Analysis

The experiment was performed by a total of 20 subjects
for a total of 900 trials (5 trials each for V, F, V ⫹ F, and 3
tissue samples to be characterized; hence 45 trials by each
subject). Ten subjects were surgeons who had experience in
MIS, and the other 10 were nonsurgeons who had no surgical
or medical background. The data were collected in a quali-
tative fashion with responses characterized as either “true” or
“false” and denoted by a value of 1 or 0, respectively. For a
particular trial of all 3-tissue samples to be characterized as
true, the subject was required to identify all 3-tissue samples
in their correct order of stiffness. The data were then analyzed
using a single-factor analysis of variance (ANOVA) method.
ANOVA generates a P value (probability) for the null hy-
pothesis (H0) and thus a probability for the research hypoth-
esis (H1) to be tested. The lower the P value, the smaller the
probability for the null hypothesis to be true and consequently
higher is the probability that there is a signiﬁcant statistical
difference between the data sets (or the research hypothesis
H1 is true). The level of signiﬁcance (␣ value) for our
statistical analysis was chosen to be 0.05, meaning that a

© 2004 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins

hypothesis would be considered true if P ⬍ ␣. In addition,
Tukey’s method was used as the post hoc ANOVA test.
Tukey’s method is used to test all pairwise mean comparisons
after an ANOVA is performed on the data set. The ANOVA
analysis can only be used if the dependent variance is the
same in each population, which was not the case in our
experimental observations. Therefore, Tukey’s method must
be used for accurate determination of statistical signiﬁcance.
This method will declare that 2 means are signiﬁcantly
different if the absolute value of the difference of the means
exceeds:

T␣ ⫽ q␣共a,f 兲冑MSE

n

where ␣ ⫽ level of signiﬁcance (0.05), a ⫽ number of popula-
tions, f ⫽ number of samples taken ⫺ number of populations,
MSE ⫽ mean square error, and n ⫽ number of samples per
population. The resulting value (T␣) represents the number at
which the level of signiﬁcance is ␣.

RESULTS

Research Hypotheses

We performed the above experiments to test the valid-
ity of 2 research hypotheses that have direct clinical rele-
vance. These are:

1. Providing only force feedback leads to better tissue
characterization for all 3 tissue samples compared with using
only vision feedback for all 3 tissue samples (Fa ⬎ Va).

2. Providing vision and force feedback simultaneously
for all 3 tissue samples is better than only vision feedback or
only force feedback for all 3 tissue samples ((V ⫹ F)a ⬎ Va,
(V ⫹ F)a ⬎ Fa).

The “⬎” sign denotes “is better than” in the above
hypotheses. Subscripts “s,” “h,” and “a” refer to soft tissue,
hard tissue, and all tissue samples, respectively.

Evaluating the Role of Force-Feedback in
Tissue Characterization

The effect of learning in the experiment was closely
examined to prevent any tainting of the data. As explained
above, the tissue samples were randomly presented in each
trial, and subjects were also given an opportunity for a replay
to eliminate any random guesses. Subjects were also given
sufﬁcient time to experiment with a sample tissue (not used in
the actual experiment) to become acquainted with the setup
and the PHANToM. Each subject spent at least 10 minutes
practicing until they felt comfortable to begin the experiment.
The order of the experiments (vision feedback alone, force
feedback alone, simultaneous vision and force feedback, and
direct exploration) was limited by the type of feedback and
therefore could not be randomized. Vision feedback alone

105

Tholey et al

Annals of Surgery • Volume 241, Number 1, January 2005

FIGURE 4. A) Percentage of successful tissue characterizations for all five trials using only vision feedback, B) Percentage of
successful tissue characterizations for all five trials using only force feedback, C) Percentage of successful tissue characterizations
for all five trials using vision and force feedback.

and force feedback alone must be tested before simultaneous
vision ⫹ force feedback and direct exploration because of the
presence of more than 1 sensory clue. If the above approach
is not followed, the subjects may link a force felt by a
particular sample to the visual cues from that sample and this
may contribute to a learning effect. The trials were thus
presented in the following order: vision feedback alone, force
feedback alone, simultaneous vision ⫹ force feedback, and
direct exploration.

To verify that there was indeed no learning effect in our
experiments, we examined the data after the experiments
were completed with all the subjects. As shown in Figure 4,
for each type of feedback (ie, vision feedback alone, force
feedback alone, and simultaneous vision ⫹ force feedback),
there was no steady increase in the percentage correct re-
sponse as the trials progressed. It can thus be concluded that
the subjects did not exhibit a learning effect as the trials
progressed. The individual results for each subject testing the
3 tissue samples in each of the 4 methods, namely, V, F, V ⫹
F, and DE, are shown is Figure 5 based on the protocol
outlined in Experimental Setup and Research Protocol for
Tissue Characterization. Overall,
the average correct re-
sponse using only vision feedback was 52%, while the aver-
age correct using only force feedback was 67%. Providing
both vision feedback and force feedback produced an average
of 83% and direct exploration produced an average of 100%
correct. Excluding direct exploration, our results conﬁrm that
on the average, subjects are more comfortable characterizing
tissues when both vision and force feedback were provided
(ratio of the average correct response to the corresponding
standard deviation was the highest with V ⫹ F compared with
only V or only F). An ANOVA analysis was performed to
evaluate whether there was a signiﬁcant difference between
the 3 data sets (V, F, V ⫹ F). The P value obtained when
comparing all 3 data sets was 0.00001325, leading to a
probability of greater than 99.99% that there was a signiﬁcant
statistical difference between the data sets. However, further
analysis is needed to determine which data sets are signiﬁ-

106

cantly different, which will be addressed in each of the
hypotheses below.

Hypothesis 1

Providing only force feedback leads to better tissue
characterization for all 3 samples compared with using only
vision feedback for all 3 samples (Fa ⬎ Va).

In our ﬁrst hypothesis,

the subjects were asked to
characterize all 3 tissue samples correctly in any given trial.
As shown in Figure 6(a), providing vision feedback alone
resulted in differentiating the tissue samples correctly in 50%
of the trials for all subjects, while using only force feedback
resulted in 67% of the trials being correct. Tukey’s method
was applied to the vision feedback and force feedback data
sets using a level of signiﬁcance of 0.05. The value of T0.05

FIGURE 5. Percentage of successful tissue characterizations for
each individual using each of the four methods. The histogram
for each subject is always presented in the order V, F, V ⫹ F,
and DE as shown in the figure for subject 1.

© 2004 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins

Annals of Surgery • Volume 241, Number 1, January 2005

Force Feedback and Minimally Invasive Surgery

FIGURE 6. A) Percentage of successful tissue characterizations by all subjects for all three tissue samples using only vision and only
force feedback, B) Percentage of successful tissue characterizations by surgeons using only vision and only force feedback, C)
Percentage of successful tissue characterizations by non-surgeons using only vision and only force feedback.

was calculated to be 0.1525, and the difference between the
means of the data sets was 0.15. Therefore, since the differ-
ence of the means was less than the value of T0.05 (although
marginal), we cannot say with conﬁdence that there is a
statistical difference between only vision feedback and only
force feedback. However, the values are very close, and
signiﬁcance of the null hypothesis was calculated to be 0.052,
which is just above the level of signiﬁcance (␣ ⫽ 0.05).

Individually, surgeons were correct in 62% and 72% of
the trials for only vision feedback and only force feedback,
respectively, while nonsurgeons were correct in 42% of the
trials using only vision feedback and 62% of the trials using
only force feedback (see Figs. 6b and c) for identifying all 3
tissue samples correctly. We analyzed the statistical differ-
ence between Va and Fa for the surgeons’ data set and the
nonsurgeons’ data set. Using Tukey’s method, the calculated
value of T0.05 was 0.2095 and 0.2194 for surgeons and
nonsurgeons, respectively. The difference in the means for
vision feedback and force feedback for surgeons and nonsur-
geons was 0.10 and 0.20, respectively. As shown, both of
these values are less than the calculated T0.05, and the sig-
niﬁcances calculated for these were 0.495 and 0.081 for
surgeons and nonsurgeons, respectively. Therefore, we can-

not conclude that surgeons will perform better tissue charac-
terizations with only force feedback than with only vision
feedback. However, there is a signiﬁcant difference between
the surgeons and nonsurgeons using the 2 methods. This is
because Tukey’s method is a measure of the difference
between the 2 data sets (vision feedback and force feedback).
The surgeons had a smaller difference (10%) than the non-
surgeons (20%) because of their experience using vision to
characterize tissues in laparoscopic procedures, which leads
to a higher signiﬁcance of the null hypothesis (0.495) for
surgeons compared with nonsurgeons (0.081). However, sur-
geons’ overall percent correct was higher than that of non-
surgeons.

Hypothesis 2

Providing vision and force feedback simultaneously for
all 3 samples is better than only vision feedback or only force
feedback for all 3 samples ((V ⫹ F)a ⬎ Va, (V ⫹ F)a ⬎ Fa).
Our second hypothesis stated that (V ⫹ F)a was better
than Va or Fa for tissue characterization. As shown in Figure
7(a), the percent correct for vision feedback, force feedback,
and simultaneous vision and force feedback was 52%, 67%,
and 83%, respectively, for identifying all 3 tissue samples

FIGURE 7. A) Percentage of successful tissue characterizations by all subjects for all three tissue samples using both vision and force
feedback, B) Percentage of successful tissue characterizations for surgeons using both vision and force feedback, C) Percentage
of successful tissue characterizations for non-surgeons using both vision and force feedback.

© 2004 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins

107

Tholey et al

Annals of Surgery • Volume 241, Number 1, January 2005

Individually,

correctly in any given trial. For direct exploration method, the
subjects characterized the 3 tissue samples correctly 100% of
the time. Tukey’s method was used to analyze the entire data
set comparing (V ⫹ F)a to Va and (V ⫹ F)a to Fa. As shown
in the ﬁrst hypothesis, T0.05 was calculated to be 0.1525 for
all subjects. The difference of the means between (V ⫹ F)a to
Va was 0.31 and the difference between (V ⫹ F)a to Fa was
0.16. Since both of these differences are higher than T0.05,
there is a signiﬁcant statistical difference between the data
sets compared. Also, the corresponding signiﬁcance of H0 for
comparing (V ⫹ F)a to Va was less than 0.001 and for
comparing (V ⫹ F)a to Fa was 0.035, leading to conﬁdence
levels of 99.99% and 96.5%, respectively, for the research
hypothesis H1 to be true. Therefore, there is a signiﬁcant
statistical difference between (V ⫹ F)a and either Va or Fa.
the surgeons’ performance was 62%,
72%, and 84% for Va, Fa, and (V ⫹ F)a, respectively, and
nonsurgeons’ performance was 42%, 62%, and 82% for Va,
Fa, and (V ⫹ F)a, respectively (see Figs. 7b and c) for
identifying all 3 tissue samples. Tukey’s method was used for
the data set containing only surgeons and the data set con-
taining only nonsurgeons. As shown in hypothesis 1, the
value of T0.05 for surgeons and nonsurgeons was 0.2095 and
0.2194, respectively. The difference of the means for the
surgeons’ data sets was 0.22 for (V ⫹ F)a versus Va, and for
the nonsurgeons’ data sets, the difference of the means was
0.40 for (V ⫹ F)a versus Va. For surgeons, the difference of
the means for (V ⫹ F)a versus Va (0.22) is greater than T0.05
(0.2095); therefore, we can conclude that providing simulta-
neous vision and force feedback to the surgeon is better than
just vision feedback. For nonsurgeons, the difference of the
means for (V ⫹ F)a versus Va (0.40) is greater than T0.05
(0.2194). Therefore for nonsurgeons also, providing simulta-
neous vision and force feedback is better than just vision
feedback. Individually, the calculated signiﬁcances of the null
hypothesis for (V ⫹ F)a versus Va was 0.036 for surgeons and
less than 0.001 for nonsurgeons. Hence, we can conclude on
an individual basis also that surgeons and nonsurgeons per-
formed better with simultaneous vision and force feedback
than only vision feedback. Thus, our claim that current MIS
procedures can greatly beneﬁt from the addition of force
feedback to vision feedback is validated.

DISCUSSION

We have developed the initial prototype of our auto-
mated laparoscopic grasper with force feedback capability
along with an information-enhanced display to provide vision
and force feedback to the user while manipulating tissues.
This tool incorporates a quick-change feature for easy con-
version between grasper, cutter, and dissector, as well as
accurate positioning of the jaws. These improvements over
conventional tools have made it easier for us to use it with
robotic systems while still retaining advantages of conven-

108

tional laparoscopic surgery. The experimental work has dem-
onstrated these advantages by showing that an operator can
easily differentiate between tissue samples of varying stiff-
ness. Our results conﬁrm that subjects are more comfortable
and more accurate at characterizing tissues with simultaneous
vision and force feedback compared with vision feedback
alone or force feedback alone. Overall, considering all 20
subjects, while hypothesis 1 (Fa ⬎ Va) was not proven
correct, hypothesis 2 ((V ⫹ F)a ⬎ Va, (V ⫹ F)a ⬎ Fa) was
validated through our experimental results. Though hypoth-
esis 1 (Fa ⬎ Va) was not validated, the signiﬁcance (0.052)
was very close to the 95% cutoff limit. The statistical analysis
has also shown that nonsurgeons performed signiﬁcantly
better with simultaneous vision and force feedback interface
than with vision feedback alone or force feedback alone. This
demonstrated that an inexperienced person could easily char-
acterize different tissue samples if they are provided with
both vision and force feedback. The performance of the
nonsurgeons can be attributed to the high difference in the
percentage correct between the various types of feedback,
which causes a lower P value, as this is a measurement of the
difference between data sets. The surgeons had higher P
values since their difference in the percentage correct was
much lower than nonsurgeons because of their training and
experience in characterizing tissues using only vision feed-
back in conventional laparoscopic surgery. The results of this
study will lead to a better understanding of the design of
automated laparoscopic tools that can provide force feedback
in surgical procedures, simulation, and training.

Although we have successfully proved that force feed-
back plays a signiﬁcant role in MIS, there were limitations in
our experiments as compared with a surgical setting. First, we
have only done studies on grasping, rather than palpation.
This was primarily due to the limitation of the hardware.
Future prototypes will be designed to overcome this limita-
tion. Second, the visual ﬁeld in our setup was restricted by a
stationary camera as opposed to a movable endoscope that
would be used in a laparoscopic procedure. The vision feed-
back part of the experiment also restricts the feedback to pure
vision, while in conventional laparoscopic procedures the
surgeon has some force feedback through the surgical tool
(primarily through the reaction force of the tool contacting an
organ or tissue). However, this force feedback, though lim-
ited in laparoscopic procedures, is completely lost in roboti-
cally assisted laparoscopic procedures. While an experienced
surgeon trains their perceptual faculties to infer the interac-
tion of the laparoscopic tool with the tissue through primarily
vision feedback (from our experiments, some surgeons had
all correct responses with vision feedback alone), it is rea-
sonable to assume (based on our experimental data) that over
time,
the perceptual ability to combine vision and force
information received from automated tools is possible. Third,
another simpliﬁcation we have made in our studies, compared

© 2004 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins

Annals of Surgery • Volume 241, Number 1, January 2005

Force Feedback and Minimally Invasive Surgery

with an actual clinical setting, is that the subject could only
fully open or fully close the automated grasper, whereas a
surgeon has more control in a surgical setting to allow for
palpation of the tissue by controlling the “angle of closing” of
the grasper jaws.

In addition to the experimental setup limitations, there
are several issues with the apparatus that we need to address
in future research. Future versions of our laparoscopic tool
must be scaled down further to incorporate this tool in all
commonly used laparoscopic procedures. This can be accom-
plished through small changes in the design, which will allow
for a smaller shaft and jaws. Currently, we use motor current
to estimate the grasping force at the jaws. In future versions,
we envision using small piezoelectric sensors placed on the
jaws to record the actual forces exerted on the tissue. This
would allow for a very accurate characterization of the tissue
sample via a haptic interface device than using the current-
based indirect estimation method as in the present prototype.
In conclusion, the experimental results and the analysis pre-
sented in this work validates our claim that force feedback
added to vision feedback leads to an improvement in tissue
characterization than using only vision feedback for MIS.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to acknowledge the support of National
Science Foundation grants EIA-0079830, EIA-0312709, and
CAREER Award IIS-0133471 for this work.

REFERENCES

1. Chen HS, Sheen-Chenn SM. Synchronous and early metachronous
colorectal adenocarcinoma: analysis of prognosis and current trends. Dis
Colon Rectum. 2000;43:1093–1099.

2. Krupa A, Morel G, de Mathelin M. Achieving high precision laparo-
scopic manipulation through adaptive force control. IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2002:1864 –1869.

3. Taylor RH, Funda J, Eldridge B, et al. A telerobotic assistant for

laparoscopic surgery. IEEE Eng Med Biol. 1995;14:279 –286.

4. Munoz VF, Vara-Thorbeck C, DeGabriel JG, et al. A medical robotic
assistant for minimally invasive surgery. IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation, Vol. 3. 2000:2901–2906.

5. Bicchi A, Canepa G, DeRossi D, et al. A sensor-based minimally
invasive surgery tool for detecting tissue elastic properties. IEEE Inter-

national Conference on Robotics and Automation, Vol. 1. 1996:884 –
888.

6. Scilingo E, DeRossi D, Bicchi A, et al. Sensor and devices to enhance
the performance of a minimally invasive surgery tool for replicating
surgeon’s haptic perception of the manipulated tissues. IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Engineering in Medicine and Biology, Vol. 3.
1997:961–964.

7. Madhani AJ, Niemeyer G, Salisbury JK. The black falcon: A teleoper-
ated surgical instrument for minimally invasive surgery. IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, Vol. 2, 1998. pp.
936 –944.

8. Hu T, Castellanos AE, Tholey G, et al. Real-time haptic feedback in
laparoscopic tool for use in gastro-intestinal surgery. Fifth International
Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted In-
tervention (MICCAI), 2002.

9. Dingshoft VVH tot, Lazeroms M, van der Ham A, et al. Force reﬂection
for a laparoscopic forceps. 18th Annual International Conference of the
IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, Vol. 1. 1996:210 –
211.

10. Rosen J, Hannaford B, MacFarlane MP, et al. Force controlled and
teleoperated endoscopic grasper for minimally invasive surgery: exper-
imental performance evaluation. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 1999;46:
1212–1221.

11. Salle D, Gosselin F, Bidaud P, et al. Analysis of haptic feedback
performances in telesurgery robotic systems. IEEE International work-
shop on Robot and Human Interactive Communication, 2001:618 – 623.
12. Tholey G, Chanthasopeephan T, Hu T, et al. Measuring grasping and
cutting forces for reality-based haptic modeling. International Confer-
ence on Computer Assisted Radiology and Surgery, 2003;794 – 800.

13. Dario P, Bergamasco M. An advanced robot system for automated
diagnostic task through palpation. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 1998;35:
118 –126.

14. Menciassi A, Eisinberg A, Scalari G, et al. Force feedback-based
microinstruments for measuring tissue properties and pulse in microsur-
gery. IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, Vol.
1. 2001:626 – 631.

15. Schurr MO, Buess GF, Neisius B, et al. Robotics and telemanipulation
technologies for endoscopic surgery: a review of the ARTEMIS project:
Advanced Robotic Telemanipulator for Minimally Invasive Surgery.
Surg Endosc. 2000;14:375–381.

16. Dario P, Corrozza MC, Peitrabissa A. Development and in vitro testing
of a miniature robotic system for computer-assisted colonoscopy. Com-
put Aided Surg. 1999;4:1–14.

17. Ohashi T, Szemes P, Korondi P, et al. Nonlinear disturbance compen-
sation for haptic device. IEEE International Symposium on Industrial
Electronics, Vol. 1. 1999:304 –309.

18. Walairacht S, Koike Y, Sato M. String-based haptic interface device for

multi-ﬁngers. IEEE Virtual Reality Proceedings, 2000:293.

19. Takahashi Y, Tomatani Y, Matsui Y, et al. Wire driven robot hand. IEEE
International Conference on Industrial Electronics, Control and Instru-
mentation, Vol. 3. 1997:1293–1298.

© 2004 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins

109

